# Ibis project governance

Ibis's governance is inspired by many open source projects that have come
before it, including but not limited to Apache Arrow, Substrait, Dask and
others.

The closest concrete model to Ibis's governance is the [**liberal contribution** model](https://opensource.guide/leadership-and-governance/#what-are-some-of-the-common-governance-structures-for-open-source-projects).

A major point in that model is:

> the people who do the most work are recognized as most influential, but this
> is based on current work and not historic contributions.

Another important point from that model is:

> Major project decisions are made based on a consensus seeking process
> (discuss major grievances) rather than pure vote, and strive to include as
> many community perspectives as possible.

## Project artifacts

The project artifacts are the code and documentation that reside in the
collection of git repositories under the
[`ibis-project`](https://github.com/ibis-project) GitHub organization.

## People

The following categories are loose categories of people involved with the Ibis
project.

These categories are not mutually exclusive.

### Users

Users are people using Ibis.

### Contributors

A contributor is someone who contributes code or documentation to the project.
The primary way someone contributes these artifacts is through GitHub Pull
Requests.

After a period of time, contributors are eligible to become committers.

### Committers

A committer is someone who has the ability to make commits to the project
without the approval of other committers or steering committee members, which
includes the ability to approve and merge pull requests.

**Pull requests should have at least one approving committer, or a stated
reason why a pull request bypassed approval**


Committers are responsible for things like:

- Code review
- Ensuring that CI remains green
- Helping on-board new contributors
- Maintaining existing code

Committers who have not made a commit to one or more repositories under the
`ibis-project` organization for a period of time will be contacted to determine
whether they are still interested in participating in the project and if not,
may have their commit rights removed.

Decision-making power leans towards those people who are currently active in
the project.

#### Becoming a committer

To become a committer, a person must have sustained contributions to one or
more projects in the organization for at least **six months**.

Candidates are nominated by a steering committee member, and must
have approval from at least 2 other steering committee members.

Nominations should be made and discussed in a [GitHub Discussion](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/discussions).

### Steering committee members

A steering committee member is a committer that shows commitment to the
long-term health of the Ibis project. In addition to the responsibilities of
committers, committee members are responsible for things like:

- Nominating others for committership and steering committee membership
- Handling security reports in a timely manner
- Enforcing the code of conduct

#### Becoming a steering committee member

Steering committee members must already be committers.

Additionally, steering committee members must have been a committer for at
least six months in addition to the six months required to become a committer
and show commitment to long-term health of the project.

New steering committee members must be nominated by another steering committee member.

The minimum number of votes required to become a steering committee member is
**three**, and only steering committee members' votes are binding.

Nominations should be made and discussed in a [GitHub Discussion](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/discussions).

## Decision-making process

### Location

Major decisions should be made **in public** using [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/discussions).

Decisions around governance itself should be discussed in
[`ibis-project/governance`'s
discussions](https://github.com/ibis-project/governance/discussions).

### Seeking consensus

Decision-making should be done by seeking consensus from as many community
perspectives as possible.

The community should be given at least one week to respond to a proposed
decision.

Large, sweeping decisions must include the support of at least two steering
committee members.

## AI policy

Any content whose majority is generated by an AI, large language model or
otherwise non-human entity must have a visible disclaimer stating such tools
were used in the creation of the content.

Use of GitHub Copilot during day to day development (for example, Python
docstring generation, function signature generation) need no such disclaimer.
